# RFC-019 -- Remove Tag URI Expansion

## Status

Not discussed yet (except for preliminary discussion).

## Proposal

* Redefine tag shorthands to be namespaces.
  Any valid tag shorthand shall reference a namespace, and that namespace shall be identified by the tag shorthand.
  For example, the standard YAML tags will live in the `!!` namespace.
  A former local tag `!local` will live in the `!` namespace.
  A former tag with custom handle `!foo!bar` will live in the `!foo!` namespace.
* Remove `%TAG` directives and define that all custom tag handles are valid without needing a `%TAG` directive to specify their expansion.
* Remove literal tags.

## Rationale

The expansion of tag shorthands adds unnecessary complexity to both parsing and presenting.
For example, a presenter needs to do a string comparison on every tag to check whether the standard YAML prefix `tag:yaml.org,2002:` can be shortened to `!!`.
On the parser side, it is necessary to memorize currently defined tags and throw them away at the end of the document (note that both `!` and `!!` can be redefined).

In reality, custom tag prefixes are rarely used – most implementations use `!!` (e.g. PyYaml with the `!!python/` prefix or SnakeYaml  allowing qualified Java package names after `!!`) and most documentation advises the user to use local tags if they need to define their own tags.

Using the [Tag URI Scheme][1] would only make sense if a tag would need to be globally unique.
However, typically, the context in which a YAML file will be parsed is well-known upon creation.
Thus it does suffice to have locally defined namespaces in the language.

Since `!!str` and `!<tag:yaml.org,2002:str>` will not mean the same anymore when URI expansion is removed, literal tags must be removed from the language.
I have never seen them used anywhere.
This also removes the need for a decision between multiple valid representations of a tag in the presenter.

Without expansion, there is no need for a `%TAG` directive.
Namespaces are defined implicitly on first usage.

 [1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4151
