RFC-011
=======

Two bare-flow-documents may be separated by a newline


## Synopsis

Target: 1.3 / 2.0

Status: 0

Tags: ...

[Discuss](../../issues/0)


## Problem

While JSON itself does not support streaming or otherwise allow multiple separate documents to be defined in a single file, [JSON streaming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_streaming) does.
The term refers to a family of protocols such as JSON Lines that allow the concatenation of multiple JSON documents, most often by using a newline `\n` as a delimiter.
These are not currently supported by YAML, but they could be.


## Proposal

This proposal is split into two stages, implementing separately minor and major changes.

### Getting 95% There with a Minor Change

Normally, documents after the first in a stream need a document marker separating them to ensure clarity.
For flow mappings and sequences, this is not required as there is no ambiguity, and the requirement should be relaxed to require at minimum a single `\n` as a separator:

```
{ first: doc }
[ second, doc ]
```

Comments and empty lines between such documents are allowed, and flow collections are not required to fit on a single line:

```
{
  first: doc
}

# this is fine
[
    second,
    doc
]
```

Using no separator, or whitespace not including `\n` as a separator, would be an error:

```
# ERROR
[ not ] { fine }
```

On output, YAML libraries should still by default include a `---` separator for documents even if the output could be parsed as valid YAML without it.
If it's desirable for the output to be parsed by non-YAML line-delimited JSON consumers, each document should be formatted as valid JSON and output on a single line.

This change could be considered semver-minor, as it does not change any existing working code.
This would also support parsing most real-world line-delimited JSON, but it would not support JSON streams that may contain documents that are JSON scalar values.

### The Other 95%

In order to support JSON scalar values, the meaning of the following stream will need to change:

```
true
true
true
```

In YAML 1.2, that parses as a top-level scalar with the value `"true true true\n"`.
As line-delimited JSON, that would parse as three documents each with the boolean value `true`.

In order for YAML to also be able to parse that as three `true` documents, plain untagged scalar values other than `true`, `false`, `null` and JSON numbers need to not be allowed at the top level of a document.
This RFC does not suggest if or how that should happen, but if it does become possible to unambiguously parse a document as ending after any possible JSON scalar value, that the relaxation of needing only a newline separator between documents should be extended from flow collections to also cover JSON scalar values.


## See Also

* [RFC-010](RFC-010.md)
* [RFC-012](RFC-012.md)
