RFC-003 -- Characters allowed in anchor names
=============================================

## Synopsis

Target: 1.3

Status: 0

Tags: anchor

[Discussion](../../issues/46)


## Problem

The YAML 1.2 spec productions allow too many characters to be in a anchor name.
Specifically, it's a bad idea to allow YAML syntax characters in an anchor name.

The YAML 1.2 spec allows:
```
x21-x7E | x85 | xA0-xD7FF | xE000-xFFFD | x10000-x10FFFF
```

Certainly `x85` and `xA0` do not belong as they are whitespace.

Neither do `!`, `#`, `:`, `*`, `&`  and many other punctuation characters, since they are YAML syntax.
Anchor names don't need to be that expressive and shouldn't look like they mean something else to YAML.

In an optimal world, anchor names should effectively be all the unicode alphanumeric characters, and few separation characters like `_`, `-`, `.` and `/`.
This should be a goal for a future major YAML spec release.

### libyaml

The popular libyaml library (over which many YAML frameworks are currently built), has a rather strict subset of characters:
```
'A'-'Z' | 'a'-'z' | '0'-'9' | '_' | '-'
```

The libyaml library also currently supports anchors of just separation chars, like: `&-`, `&---`, `&_-__`.
It also currently supports names that do not begin or end with and alphanumeric character.
These things are not desirable, but not terrible either.


## Proposal

* An implementation MUST accept anchor names composed of one or more of the following characters:
  ```
  'A'-'Z' | 'a'-'z' | '0'-'9' | '_' | '-' | '.' | '/'
  ```

* An implementation MAY accept anchor names composed of one or more of the following unicode characters:
  ```
  \p{Letter} | \p{Number} | '_' | '-' | '.' | '/'

  # TODO: Find the all the exact code point ranges implied by \p{Letter} | \p{Number}.
  ```

  This is the unicode character set targeted for a future YAML spec major release.

* Anchor names SHOULD begin and end with an alphanumeric character, and SHOULD NOT have multiple consecutive separation characters.
  A YAML implementation MAY issue an error or a warning about names that do not comply with this.


## See Also

* [Original](../../wiki/RFC-003)
