# RFC-009 -- Allow aliases that do not map to anchors within the document

## Status

Proposed.

## Problem

A common use-case is that some parts of the data in a YAML document is not defined when writing the document, but when loading it.
Current solutions either preprocess or postprocess the YAML document, using techniques like string interpolation on the loaded scalars' values.
This RFC tries to tackle this problem by allowing externally defined values being referenced inside a
YAML document.

A similar use-case is the definition and subsequent usage of variables.
For example:

```yaml
variables:
  - &basepath /tmp/
actual values:
  path1: *basepath
  path2: *basepath
```

The problem with these documents is that the variable definitions are part of the resulting document while they really do not need to.
This RFC also provides a solution for that problem.

## Proposed changes

* Aliases do not need to be resolved to an anchor in the same document anymore.
* A YAML processor may provide any number of pre-defined anchors.
  If an alias is encountered that cannot be resolved to an anchor in the same document, the YAML processor shall try to match it to those pre-defined anchors.
  If no predefined anchor with that name exists, this shall result in an error.
* An annotation `@vars` is defined which shall only be used on a root mapping.
  If a YAML processor encounters such a root mapping while loading a stream, it shall transform all key-value pairs into predefined anchors with the key as the anchor name (all keys must be scalars) and the value as the anchor's node.
  These predefined anchors shall be valid for the subsequent YAML document in the same stream.
  The document containing the `@vars` shall not be emitted as loaded value.
  A YAML processor may also provide an API to explicitly specify a document containing the `@vars` for loading another document.

## Examples

```yaml
# valid document:
---
- *one
- *two
```

```yaml
# input:
--- @vars
foo: bar
baz:
- one
- two
---
foo: &baz

# output:
---
bar:
- one
- two
```
