# RFC-016 -- Enforce tag URI scheme for tags

## Problem

YAML 1.2 recommends using the [`tag:` URI scheme][1] for global tags.
However, this is not enforced by any productions, and so tags can be any sequence of characters valid inside an URI.

Because of this, a YAML implementation typically represents tags as arbitrary strings (I have seen not one implementation doing something different).
So this YAML file:

    --- !!str
    scalar

is loaded as a scalar event with the tag string `tag:yaml.org,2002:str`.
This is a pretty bad thing for writing a representer, because if it wants to represent that tag as `!!str`, it needs to make a string comparison to check whether the tag starts with `tag:yaml.org,2002:` and then replace that by `!!`.
This is also true for other global tag URIs like the one NimYAML uses (starting with `tag:nimyaml.org,2016:` and shortened to `!n!`).

## Proposal

Define that a tag can be one of two things: Either a proper URI following the tag URI scheme as defined in [RFC 4151][2] or a `!` followed by the *specific* part of the tag URI scheme.
For clarification, this is the tag URI scheme:

    tagURI = "tag:" taggingEntity ":" specific [ "#" fragment ]
    taggingEntity = authorityName "," date
    authorityName = DNSname / emailAddress
    specific = *( pchar / "/" / "?" )

I dropped some of the obvious productions.
Additional, since we do not need it and there is no sensible semantic for it, the optional `[ "#" fragment ]` part of the URI is not allowed to be part of a tag URI.

## Rationale

With this definition, a tag can always be stored like this:

    +-----------------+
    |       TAG       |
    +-----------------+
    | EntityID entity |
    | String specific |
    +-----------------+

Where EntityID can be a string (e.g. `yaml.org,2002`) or an integral ID type whose values map to the string entity (speeding up the representer as it won't need to do string comparison).
For local tags, the entity string may be `!`, the empty string or `NULL` in languages where the string type is nullable to denote that the tag has no entity.

Both ways, the representer knows beforehand which part of the tag is substitutable with a tag shorthand (e.g. `!!`).
This avoids strange things like this:

    %TAG !t! tag:yaml.org,2002:s
    --- !t!tr
    scalar

This YAML produces a scalar event with tag `tag:yaml.org,2002:str`.
Assume a representer tries to output this YAML event while knowing the additional TAG directive given in the input (most YAML parsers, including libyaml, include TAG directives in their document start event, so it can be forwarded to the representer).
The representer would need to decide whether to ouput `!t!tr` or `!!str` as tag.
While this may seem a strange case, when implementing a representer, the implementor currently must think about this.

Therefore, this proposal makes implementing a representer which outputs tag shorthands easier.

 [1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4151
 [2]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4151
