# RFC-008 -- Annotations

## Status

Proposed for 2.0.

## Problem

In some areas where YAML is used, the need for pre- or postprocessing YAML data structures arises.
For example, in Ansible and SaltStack, the templating framework Jinja is used.
The problem with this approach is that Jinja does not understand the YAML structure and the user needs to take extra care about the whitespace in the resulting YAML character stream.
Another use-case would be string interpolation which in some frameworks happens after processing the YAML input.

This RFC provides a way of adding information to a node which may be used by an implementation to apply some special processing to it during some processing step after parsing it into an event stream.

## Proposed Definitions

### Syntax

* The character `@` shall henceforth be called *annotation indicator*.
* An *annotation* consists of a *namespace* handle `/@([A-Za-z]*@)?/` similar to a *tag shorthand*, a *local part* which is identical to a *tag handle*'s *local part*, and an optional *parameter list*, which, if it exists, starts directly after the local part with a `(`.
  The parameter list is a list of YAML nodes that is processed analogously to a flow sequence with the difference that `)` is a special character which ends the argument list.
  The complete production for an annotation will be:
  ```
  annotation ::= annotation_handle annotation_local_part [ argument_list ]
  annotation_handle ::= “@” (ns-word-char* “@”)?
  annotation_local_part ::= ns-tag-char+
  argument_list ::= “(” s-separate(n,c)?
                    ns-s-flow-seq-entries(n, param-in)? “)”
  ```

The `param-in` context is used to forbid `)` as part of any scalar content.

* An annotation starts an *annotated node*.
  An annotated node is a new kind of *Node* as defined in the YAML serialization model.
  As such, it may have a tag and an anchor.
  Furthermore, it contains a namespace, which is equivalent to the annotation handle; a name, which is equivalent to the annotation identifier; a list of ordered nodes, which is equivalent to the parameter list; and exactly one child node, which is the node being annotated.
* Since an annotated node is a Node, it may occur anywhere where other nodes may occur.
  The placement of the annotation in the presentation stream shall follow the same rules as for node properties.
  For example, an annotation may occur directly after a directives end marker (`---`), but the child node must occur at the next line.
  In other contexts, the child node may be placed on the same line as the annotation.
* A child node may be another annotated node.
  The parameter list may also contain annotated nodes.

Examples:

```yaml
--- @ann   # annotates the following sequence
- one
- two
- three
```

```yaml
---
@@include four.yaml # on the same line as the scalar it annotates
```

```yaml
--- @ns@replace('\s', '') # takes two scalar parameters
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.
```

```yaml
--- @inherit(@include base.yaml) # parameter is an annotated node
foo: bar
```

### Semantics

* Annotations may be processed as part of loading a YAML character stream.
  Each specific annotation must define the loading step at which it shall be processed.
  These may be:

  1. generating the event stream
  2. generating the representation graph
  3. generating the native objects
  4. not at all

  This is called the *step ID*.
  The ID 4 (*not at all*) is the default for all annotations that are not implemented by a YAML implementation.
  For each annotated node, the step ID of its name *must* be equal or lesser than the step ID of any annotations that occur within the annotated node's parameters or child node.
  This ensures that annotations can always be processed according to a postfix order of the YAML graph.
  Annotations having an ID lesser than `4` in some YAML implementation are called *supported annotations* for this implementation.
* A *supported annotation* shall not be present in the data set corresponding to its step ID or any later data set.
  For example, if an annotation's step ID is `2` and it occurs in a YAML document, it shall be part of the parsed event stream, but not of the representation graph or the native objects.
* Supported annotations shall be well-defined transformations from a data set to another with the same data model, corresponding to their ID.
  If, for example, the annotation's ID is `1`, it shall define a transformation from an event stream to an event stream.
  That transformation shall be invoked exactly once for every instance of the annotation in the corresponding data set.
  It shall assume that the annotation's instance's parameters and the annotated node do not contain further annotation nodes (as they would have already been processed).
  The resulting data set shall have at most one less instances of the annotation being processed than the input data set.
  This ensures no endless loops when processing annotations.
* In principle, annotations may do anything to the input data set as long as the resulting data set conforms to the rule above.
  However, there are several *good practices* defined so that mixing annotations defined by different people or organization is possible.
  These *good practices* are:

  * An annotation should not modify any part of the document that is not a part of the subtree starting at the annotated node, unless the annotation's instance is the root node of a YAML document, in which case it is allowed to remove that YAML document entirely.
  * An exception to the rule above is that any annotation may create additional documents at the end of the YAML stream.
* A YAML implementation must provide the ability to halt with an error if it encounters an unknown annotation, but it is not required to do so by default.
  Ignoring all annotations (i.e. treating them as being handled on step ID `4`) is a valid way of dealing with them.
* Definitions of annotation groups along with their semantics may be published as optional extensions to the YAML specification.
* Every specification of an annotation must define the allowed node types of it parameters and child node.
  It may place additional restrictions on those node (like e.g. length of a sequence).
  If the YAML implementation supports the annotation, using it on an unsupported node type shall result in a loading error.
  No overloading of annotation names (e.g. with different parameter count or types) shall be possible.
  However, an annotation may define that it can be used with either two or three parameters, assigning a semantic for both options.
* The namespace `@@` shall be reserved for annotations specified as official, optional extensions to the YAML standard.
  All other namespaces may be used at will by any implementation.

### Implementation Advice

Annotations are complex objects, since both the parameter list and the child node may be large YAML structures.
Therefore, it should generate a start and an end event inside the event stream.
For example, this YAML stream:
```yaml
--- @replace('\s', '') # takes two scalar parameters
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.
```

should create the following event stream:

```
+STR
+DOC
+ANN @replace
=VAL '\s
=VAL '
-ANN
=VAL :Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.
-DOC
-STR
```

As shown, the start and end event for the annotation encloses the parameter list.
the child node is the node immediately behind the annotation end event.

## Examples:

```yaml
simple annotation: @one foo
extended annotation: @<two three> bar
multiple annotations: @four @five [1, 2]
annotations with parameters:
  @parameterized(1, 2, 3) foo
```

For an example of a set of annotations, look at [[the Transformations Extension|The Transformations Extension]].

## Rationale

* The `)` only gets to be a special character within a parameter list so that no valid YAML 1.2 document will be invalid because of containing that character inside scalar content.
* Annotations are not node properties for several reasons:

  * If they were, they would be part of the node they belong to in the event stream.
    This would lead to the event structure being non-flat (a node event with an annotation with parameters would need to contain those parameter nodes), which is a bad thing for a stream-based format.
  * Aliases would not be able to be annotated.
  * To allow stacking, it would be necessary for a node to carry any number of annotations as properties, which would make the data structure more complex.

[1]: The-Transformations-Extension
