# RFC-018 -- Deprecate Directives

## Status

Not discussed yet (except for preliminary discussion).

## Proposal

Remove all directives.

In **YAML 1.3**, lines that start with `%` at a place where 1.2 allows directives shall be ignored and should issue a warning message telling the user that directives are deprecated.
`%` shall still be forbidden to start a plain scalar.

In later YAML versions, `%` may me removed from [c-indicator][1] so that it can start plain scalars.
This will make `%YAML 1.2` being parsed as a plain scalar and thus obsolete the transitional deprecation warning.

## Rationale

Directives add unnecessary complexity to the language.
The `%TAG` directive is made obsolete by [RFC-019](RFC-019.md) so only `%YAML` would remain.
Since YAML is seldom used to transport data between applications, including the YAML version that has been used for encoding is of little use and does not justify the added complexity.
There is also no implementation I am aware of that chooses a parser implementation based on the content of a `%YAML` directive.

The deprecation will not break any valid YAML 1.2 document that would otherwise be valid YAML 1.3 – it only adds warnings about the deprecation.

 [1]: http://www.yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#c-indicator

## Examples

```yaml
# valid in 1.2 and 1.3; issues a warning in 1.3
%YAML 1.2
---
foo

# invalid in 1.2, valid in 1.3 but issues a warning
%YAML lorem ipsum
---
foo

# valid in 1.2 and 1.3, issues a warning in both
%UNKNOWN tag
---
foo
```


## Comments

* "There is also no implementation I am aware of that chooses a parser implementation based on the content of a `%YAML` directive." Plan is for YAML::PP to use the 1.1 types for a document instead of 1.2 Schema if it sees a directive -- @perlpunk 2018-03-04
* https://github.com/eemeli/yaml behaves differently depending on the YAML directive @perlpunk 2019-09-26
